When I was a kid, I learned that the
three things a human needed were food,
clothing, and shelter. Shelter, or
housing, is still as essential as ever.
Yet, we seem to have a hard time
providing enough high-quality,
affordable housing to everyone who needs
it. We have people who sleep on the
streets without it, and people who live
with their parents unable to afford
their own. This video will discuss
several important facets on the topic of
housing. We'll touch on home ownership,
housing affordability, and homelessness.
Let's get started after the bike bell.
Let's start by talking about home
ownership. The United States is
currently a nation of homeowners. About
65% of households own the home they
currently live in. That figure isn't
true everywhere. College towns often
have higher rates of renting than owning
due to all the student rentals. But in
general, more households own than rent.
This is in part due to cultural reasons.
Our country has attributed certain
values to home ownership, like stability
and family, but also for more practical
ones. Once a household pays off their
home loan, they don't have to pay for
that housing anymore. Same for taxes and
insurance. That's a nice benefit. They
also don't have a landlord telling them
they can't paint their walls. Finally,
home ownership is the primary form of
wealth accumulation in the United
States. For many, homes are an
investment. Renting has its perks, too.
You won't be burdened by expensive
repairs to your home, as your landlord
has to take care of that, and it makes
your housing situation more flexible if
you need to move frequently. Renters and
owners tend to have different needs,
interests, and demographics. Homeowners
are disproportionately wealthy and
white. And because there are more
homeowners in the US, they tend to have
a lot more political power locally. This
is part of the reason communities across
the United States are dealing with the
not in my backyard movement or nimism.
Homeowners are concerned about their
property values, and it's such an
important form of wealth accumulation,
they're nervous about any change to
their neighborhood that could lower
their property values. Now, this is not
true for all homeowners everywhere, but
I need to bring this up as nimism is an
extremely powerful movement in local
government. Renters, on the other hand,
tend to be lower income, more diverse,
and younger. Their needs aren't always
given the same consideration as
homeowners. This is even true at the
level of federal housing policy. In the
United States, we have federal
government policies that assist people
with both owning and renting. Though,
it's generally a better deal to be a
homeowner. That's because the federal
government offers the mortgage interest
deduction. This allows homeowners to
deduct the amount they pay on mortgage
interest from their taxable income,
which means they pay less in taxes. It's
really a very good deal, and that means
that the government foregoes billions of
dollars every year, essentially a
giveaway to homeowners. There is no such
thing as a rent deduction for renters.
Low-income renters have a few programs
aimed at them, and the most important
are housing choice vouchers. These are
sometimes known by their old name,
section 8 vouchers. Very low-income
households can apply for them, and they
provide additional money to help pay for
the rent on a home. Households still
have to pay 30% of their income toward
rent. This program has helped millions
of households find housing, and the
waiting list for this program can get
very long. They're getting even longer
these days because housing is
increasingly unaffordable. Not too long
ago, this was a crisis that only existed
in major cities, particularly those in
coastal cities. Today, it's spreading
all over the map. Even those who can
afford a house find it challenging to
manage the payments. In my home state of
California, four in 10 households live
in unaffordable housing. This means that
those households are spending more than
30% of their income on their place. It's
even worse for renters when compared to
owners. More than half of renter
households paid over 30% of their income
toward housing in 2017. And more than a
quarter of renters paid over half their
incomes toward housing, a position the
Department of Housing and Urban
Development considers severely
costburdened.
How did US cities get into this crisis?
Well, like many issues facing local
governments, the answer is complicated
and multifaceted. Some of the causes are
structural or at the nationwide level
out of the reach of local policy
intervention. This includes wages that
have not grown as fast as housing costs
have, increasing the affordability gap.
But there are things governments can do
to get out of the crisis because
sometimes the crisis is due in part to
local policy decisions. Right now,
there's simply not enough new housing
being constructed in the United States
to keep up with population growth and
urbanization, the process of people
moving into urban areas. There are a few
reasons for this. First, people may not
want to live next to more housing or
higher density housing. In many cities,
upwards of 90% of the land area is zoned
for single family homes. Zoning is the
practice of assigning land uses and
intensities to parcels in a city. Most
land in cities is meant for the
exclusive production of single family
homes. This is not an efficient use of
land as we see more people moving to
cities and residents of these single
family neighborhoods often do not want
to see their zoning change to allow for
more housing nearby. This is due in part
to something I mentioned earlier in the
video, property values. Residents worry
that increasing the zoning intensity and
housing nearby will have a negative
impact on their property values, harming
their long-term investment. That said,
cities and states across the US are
making strides to allow for the
construction of more market rate and
affordable housing. There's no easy
answer and most communities are using a
variety of approaches to attack the
problem from all sides. Here are a few
key strategies. The first is allowing
accessory dwelling units in areas zone
for single family housing. These are
small attached or detached homes on the
same property as a primary residence.
These ADUs can be affordable housing,
particularly because they're small and
can provide an additional revenue source
for the family living in the primary
residence. If ADUs, as they're known,
are built throughout all the land zone
for single family, it can significantly
increase the number of available housing
units. The best thing about these new
small homes is they really don't change
the character of the neighborhoods.
They're often out of sight in backyards,
and most neighborhoods have sufficient
curbside parking to accommodate the new
residents. On a similar topic, cities
can encourage the construction of
missing middle housing. Missing middle
housing is called that because it's
housing bigger than an apartment but
smaller than a full-size house and is
often not built at all in US cities.
ADUs are one example of missing middle
housing, but so too are duplexes,
triplexes, forplexes, and town homes.
Families today come in all different
sizes, and having a wide variety of
housing types ensures the right fit for
everyone. If you're a single person
living alone, a 2,000 foot single family
house may not be appealing, but you
might buy it anyway because you want to
build equity and take advantage of those
wealth accumulation benefits. Even if
you hate the idea of mowing the lawn,
you might have purchased a townhouse
instead with a modest patio outback. If
that had been an option, and as a bonus,
town homes and other missing middle
housing are a more efficient use of
land, allowing more people to live
closer to jobs, schools, parks, and
other amenities. To make missing middle
housing happen, we have to zone more
land for higher density housing, lower
parking requirements, and possibly
incentivize construction. There's one
last strategy I want to mention in this
video, and I want to be clear again that
there are so many strategies that I
can't mention them all, like allowing
stinkers to stay apartment buildings,
allowing owners to split their lots,
funding public housing programs, and
more. But the last thing I wanted to
mention was mixeduse housing. This means
zoning more land in our cities for
housing to coexist with shops,
restaurants, dentist office, and other
compatible uses. This often looks like
an apartment building like this.
Commercial uses on the ground floor and
a few floors of housing above. This
allows people to walk more to their
daily destinations, which can reduce
emissions and traffic. Many cities have
areas zoned for mixed use, but they're
only found in the central business
districts or near highfrequency transit
stations. Expanding mixeduse zones
allows for more housing construction and
helps create pleasant, walkable
neighborhoods. Cities need to encourage
the construction of more housing as soon
as possible because people in poverty
are experiencing the worst of its
effects and many are becoming homeless.
It's a myth that all homeless people are
addicted to a substance or mentally ill.
increasingly as people who can't find
housing they can afford. This can be due
to an eviction, rising rents, family
strife, or some other reason. Some of
the homelessness is invisible to us. The
person sleeping in their car or couch
surfer surfing between friends and
relatives. What can be done? Well, the
first one is obvious. Build more
affordable housing. More available
housing will likely lower rents, making
housing more attainable to low-income
people. One of the most cost-effective
ways addressing homelessness is helping
those people who are housing insecure.
Now, these are people paying a majority
of their income on rent, experiencing
overcrowding or can't make rent on a
regular basis. One of the most important
things we can do for this group is
expand the housing choice voucher
program I mentioned earlier in the
video. It would help people receive a
reliable source of rental assistance.
This program works well, but is
underfunded for the need, particularly
in this crisis. Back in 2013, only 26%
of eligible households received
assistance, and this is likely worse
today. Of course, communities should
have homeless shelters to temporarily
house those experiencing homelessness.
But shelters are a short-term solution.
A community should develop pathways to
get people in stable, longerterm
housing. This can include transitional
housing, a halfway step between a
short-term shelter and permanent
affordable housing. People experiencing
domestic violence or mental illness may
need separate transitional housing to
support their particular needs. With so
many reasons someone may become
homeless, there's no one easy solution
to the problem. That's really the story
of housing in general. It can be easy to
diagnose the problem, the lack of
affordable housing. The reality of
solving that problem is multifaceted and
complex, like I said. But understanding
it, even at its basic level, is a good
first start. Thanks for watching this
video, and if you're interested in
learning more, check out the rest of the
videos in this planning basics playlist.